Last but certainly not least we have reduce reduce is a built in array method.
You pass a callback to it and just like all the methods we've seen in this section I saved it for last.
Because reduce is a bit different.
It's really useful and versatile but it also is a little tricky to explain.
So this image is not here for you to be afraid of reduce.
It's here showing you my own fear of teaching reduce every time I teach it.
It goes well enough but I always feel like I could've done that better.
And I'm always worried not actually stressing about it but it's always something that I worry about
making better because it's just not that easy to teach.
Reduce is something that you just need to practice in order to get good with it.
So what is reduce.
Why is it even named reduce.
We've seen many like for each.
That seems like a pretty standard name.
It does something for each element.
We've seen every or filter or sort reduce is maybe not as intuitive.
But here's what it does it takes an array of values and it reduces them down to a single value which
is what this little diagram is.
I spent a long time working on this.
It's all just clip art but I couldn't find the right stuff.
The idea is each one of these is maybe representing an element in an array and they're being combined
and reduced down to a single droplet of liquid.
So applications for reduce include things like summing every element in an array.
That's probably the simplest one will start with.
But it's not always about summing or multiplying or accumulating data in one number.
It could be finding the maximum value in an entire array.
We're reducing this array of 100 numbers down to one maximum.
It could also be tallying votes or tallying data in an array or in an object.
So I'm going to split reduced into a couple different videos.
We're going to start with the basics here.
We're gonna talk about how it works with the simplest example of something every element in an array.
So reduce is an Array method we pass in a callback and that callback needs to follow a particular format.
That format looks like this.
It's a callback with at least two parameters.
Now the documentation calls this first one accumulator.
Other people will call it total but this is the variable where the parameter that will store the end
result of reduce.
And then we have current value or Val or element.
This represents each individual element in the array as reduced works its way across.
So it doesn't matter what you name them but the first thing the first parameter here will store the
total or the accumulated value that we're reducing down to.
And then current value or just the second parameter here stores each individual element.
So this example sums all numbers in this array.
If we take a look at this table I think it helps explain how it works.
The accumulator variable is going to start as the first element in the array and current value starts
as the next element.
And if you look at what we're returning accumulator plus current value so take the current total which
is initialized to the first element three add it to the next value five current value.
That gives us eight.
So we return eight.
That is then used as accumulator in the next iteration.
So accumulator now remembers the last time the last sum which was eight.
So now accumulator is eight in current value is the next element seven.
So we add them together and return that which is 15 and now reduce runs again or if the callback rather
runs again accumulator is now 15.
It remembers the value from last time the sum or the total and current value is nine.
So we add 15 and nine that's what I'm reducing or how I'm reducing we get 24.
It goes one more time accumulator is 24.
On the fourth call it holds a sum of all of these elements before it.
And now current value is the last element eleven.
So we return the sum of twenty four and eleven which gives us thirty five and we've hit the end.
So reduce returns thirty five.
That is the total accumulated value.
So we end up with thirty five as the return value.
So again think of it this way we're taking a bunch of values and we're reducing them down to a single
value.
And the function that we pass in has to follow this format where the first thing is a total or the accumulator
or just the place the value that you are reducing and it will hold the value each time that changes
or it can change.
So every time this function runs it's past the previous return value of the function and then current
value is whichever value we're working on.
So let's try it again.
Let's do something slightly different.
Let's do a simple array we'll go with numbers just to keep it easy.
Let's go.
How about three four five six seven.
Okay.
And then if we call numbers dot reduced and I want to multiply all numbers together and end up with
a product of all of these numbers I need to pass in my callback which follows that format you can see
here I'm actually getting the autocomplete or the preview where the first value of the first parameter
they call it previous value in V.S. code and current value is the second parameter.
Let's call this one total instead of accumulator accumulator sounds a little intense.
So total and then curve curve Val I guess current value is fine and then I'll do an arrow function so
I need a set of parents around the two parameters and then my arrow and I won't do this one on one line
will return manually I want to multiply total by the current Val and then let's save this to a variable
const product equals what does product equal we get twenty five twenty okay I guess that's probably
right let's see three times four times five times six times seven.
There we go.
Okay.
So if you feel like you understand how it works you can go ahead and stop watching this video and move
on to the more advanced ways of using reduce which is the next video but if you want to step through
this step by step let's go ahead and do it.
So the very first time reduce calls our callback total is going to be initialized to the first element.
So I'm gonna make a little table here.
We'll go with total and then all the way over here we'll have current Val so the first time through
it initialize this total to three right there then current Val is going to be set to the very next element
which is four and we are returning total times current Val so we return twelve and produce remembers
that if if we want to personify it it remembers the previous return value which was twelve so it uses
twelve as total.
The next time through it passes 12 as a total and then current value is going to be five.
So we get twelve and then all the way over here.
No I made it so far away.
We have five now what's five times twelve What is that sixty.
Is that right.
Yeah.
Right OK so the return value is 60 this time and 60 is now the new total and current value is going
to be six.
So we have 60 and then six and then the callback is called One More Time 60 times six is thirty six
hundred no 360.
Excuse me so that is the new total that is returned from this iteration here return total 60 times six.
That's 360.
That is the new total.
And the final value in the array is seven.
So we end up now with 360 times seven which gives us two thousand five hundred and twenty.
So that is a step by step walkthrough.
Remember that the first parameter is the total it is the thing you are boiling down to you're reducing
down to and you're keeping track it persists.
You can think of it as having a memory throughout this whole iterative cycle and then current value
changes every time depending on which iteration we're on which element we're actually using.
So this is a simple example of multiplying everything we saw how we could sum all elements in an array.
Next we'll see some more advanced use cases for reduce.